GraphQLConf 2023 recap (#1400)
the-guild-org/website: website/pages/blog/graphqlconf-2023-recap.mdx

---
title: GraphQLConf 2023 Recap

> authors: [laurin, urigo]

Author: ```suggestion
authors: [laurin, uri]
```

3. That innovation leads to multiple great open source solutions at any layer of the stack - choice
   for developers - separate the concerns between gateway, subgraph and schema registry - no need
   for vendor lock-in, choose the best tool for each layer
4. That innovation leads to new ways people use GraphQL, beyond the classic Client-Server gateway
   solutions
5. With GraphQL Conf, the first open GraphQL Conference, the community can find all the available
   tools and innovations in one place

> There are too many great talks to cover, lucky you can find the recordings of all the workshops
> and talks [on the website's schedule (click on each talk)](https://graphql.org/conf/schedule/)

The first day of the conference was workshops day, with many great practical workshops across
everything GraphQL. You can find all the workshops and their recording in the schedule
[here](https://graphql.org/conf/schedule/)

The second day started with welcoming remarks by Lee, followed with great keynotes by Marc-Andre,
Keith Babo, Theo Browne (would couldn't believe he was invited to give a keynote ;) ) , Bryan
Robinson, and our very own Uri Goldshtein.

> [Uri's keynote on the state of GraphQL](<https://graphql.org/conf/schedule/e29bf518adeb99b2319fa8cb70d8f445/?name=Open%20Federation%20-%20Open%20Remote%20Schema%20Specifications%20with%20Other%20Specs%20(OpenAPI,%20etc.)>)

Author: ```suggestion
[Uri's keynote on the state of GraphQL](https://graphql.org/conf/schedule/e29bf518adeb99b2319fa8cb70d8f445/?name=Open%20Federation%20-%20Open%20Remote%20Schema%20Specifications%20with%20Other%20Specs%20(OpenAPI,%20etc.))
```

focused on highlighting the biggest open source innovations from the last year, the ones that were
being announced at the conference and how we all can use them to improve our GraphQL developer
experience. This talk also acted as a guide to some of the talks at the conference. He covered
important releases for GraphQL Clients and GraphQL Gateways. One of the key takeaways was the
emergence of GraphQL gateways as a common pattern.

For a long time, developers had limited options when it came to choosing a GraphQL gateway. However,
now we are **witnessing a flourishing and diverse range of gateways being built in various
languages** like Apollo Router, Hot Chocolate, Cosmos, and our own GraphQL Mesh. The future promises
friendly competition between the teams and companies behind these projects. Uri highlighted the

> available choices and alternatives out there and also talked about how should you go about choosing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
available choices and alternatives out there and also talked about how you should go about choosing
```

the right gateway solution for you.

He then announced **the most important release of the conference - the new GraphQL Fusion spec** by
ChilliCream and The Guild, Hasura, IBM, AWS AppSync, WunderGraph and many more. An open spec, under
the Foundation, for remote execution and federation of services that challenges the existing
patterns of specification-less Apollo Federation with a fresh approach.

He ended with the message - We are just getting started!

**The conference was a testament to the growing popularity and importance of GraphQL.** Whether
attendees were just starting to explore GraphQL, had already adopted it, or were active contributors

> in the GraphQL ecosystem, everyone played a vital role in the success and future of GraphQL. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the GraphQL ecosystem, everyone plays a vital role in the success and future of GraphQL. The
```

energy and enthusiasm in the conference halls were palpable, and it was evident that we are just
scratching the surface of what GraphQL can achieve.

![Discussion Panel at GraphQLConf 2023 - photo by graphql.org/conf](/blog-assets/graphqlconf-2023-recap/7.jpg)

It also showed that in an open conference you can find deep and nuanced perspectives on
architectural choices. For example, on the GraphQL Gateways subject, even with talks and
announcements on great toolings for that type of architecture, it's important to note that schema
composition, GraphQL gateways, and other tools should be adopted based on their practical benefits
in specific workflows. The conference emphasized that these solutions should be embraced only if
they genuinely enhance the efficiency and productivity of your company's engineering team. GraphQL
Fusion
([Conf Talk](https://graphql.org/conf/schedule/4a4e842d1cd0c06083f484d31225abd1/?name=GraphQL%20Fusion:%20Rethinking%20Distributed%20GraphQL)),
for example, offers adaptability to any GraphQL setup, making it easier to migrate to a more
distributed setup in the future and even support for federating APIs that are not GraphQL (OpenAPI,

> SOAP, gRPC, etc...). On the other hand, Apollo Federation requires a specific subgraph structure.

Reviewer: maybe unnecessary to mention apollo here

> SOAP, gRPC, etc...). On the other hand, Apollo Federation requires a specific subgraph structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SOAP, gRPC, etc.). On the other hand, Apollo Federation requires a specific subgraph structure.
```

persisted queries or HTTP and response caching sparked engaging discussions among developers,
showcasing the collective effort needed to improve GraphQL implementation within companies.

![Uri at GraphQLConf 2023 - photo by graphql.org/conf](/blog-assets/graphqlconf-2023-recap/2.jpg)

Lastly, the conference showcased several innovative projects that challenge the way we currently use
GraphQL.
[Grafast](https://graphql.org/conf/schedule/275443caa2eda5df06699b724efa533c/?name=The%20Future%20of%20Efficiency%20Is%20Here:%20Add%20Planning%20to%20Your%20Schema!),
for instance, introduces a more efficient approach to implementing GraphQL schemas, while
[Houdini](https://graphql.org/conf/schedule/ce430c038efa9a9c19743d1ccc702de9/?name=Houdini:%20A%20GraphQL-First%20Meta-Framework)
and
[Isograph](https://graphql.org/conf/schedule/2517f7a1d13ad3c0652e1b3cc5b65714/?name=Isograph%20%E2%80%94%20Rethink%20GraphQL-Powered%20React%20Apps)
are exciting new GraphQL clients inspired by Relay, taking the GraphQL experience to new heights.
These projects sparked lively discussions and left us with a sense of anticipation and plenty of new

> ideas to explore and improve the GraphQL community as a whole. And if we look very far aheads to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ideas to explore and improve the GraphQL community as a whole. And if we look ahead to the
```

future,
[Aleksandra's talk about AI, GraphQL, and the Rise of Malleable Applications](https://graphql.org/conf/schedule/4feef977ceb883c69c91ccd2dd607aec/?name=AI,%20GraphQL,%20and%20the%20Rise%20of%20Malleable%20Applications)

> gave us a glimpse at what would be possible in the near future!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gave us a glimpse at the upcoming possibilities!
```

We extend our heartfelt **thanks to everyone who attended GraphQL Conf 2023**. For those who
couldn't make it, don't worry! Its impossible to cover the span of amazing talks that happened
there, but the recordings of all the workshops and talks are already
[available on the website's schedule (click on each talk)](https://graphql.org/conf/schedule/),
ensuring that the knowledge and insights shared during the conference can reach a wider audience. We
also invite you to join the discussions on the official [GraphQL discord](discord.graphql.org),
where the vibrant community continues to thrive. Also, new community Meetup groups have been
announced at the conference, so make sure to
[signup here](https://linuxfoundation.surveymonkey.com/r/KWNWSM5) to attend, speak or organize your
local Meetup.

![The Guild's booth](/blog-assets/graphqlconf-2023-recap/booth.jpg)

> **The overwhelming response and attendance at the conference have made clear that GraphQL Conf will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The overwhelming participation and turnout at the conference have made clear that GraphQL Conf will
```

> return in 2024.** So, if you missed out this year, there will be more opportunities to meet and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
return in 2024.** So, if you missed out this year, rest assured there will be more opportunities to meet and
```

connect with the GraphQL community. Let us know how can we make GraphQL Conf 2024 even better!

**See you next year!**

### The Guild at GraphQL Conf

Many conference participants asked us about our choice of a GraphQL Gateway, server and schema
registry. We are always trying to be as unbiased as possible, highlighting all the possible choices
and making sure everyone knows that **our individual tools work separately and integrate with any
other tool in the ecosystem**, including our competitors - **the opposite of a vendor lock-in**, so
you can choose the best tool that works for you. But, if we need to provide a simple answer, without
looking at your particular use case, our choice of tools and architecture is:

- GraphQL Server - [Yoga Server](https://the-guild.dev/graphql/yoga-server) (see
  [comparison to other servers](https://the-guild.dev/graphql/yoga-server/docs/comparison))
- GraphQL Gateway - [GraphQL Mesh](https://the-guild.dev/graphql/mesh) (Supports Federation v1, v2,
  Stitching and upcoming support for Fusion and subgraphs from any API Protocol like OpenAPI, gRPC,

>   etc...)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  etc.)
```
